# *Code for:* Eco-evolutionary dynamics of temperate phages in periodic environments

*By Tapan Goel, 2024*

## General Description

This repository contains all the code need to replicate the figures and analysis show in the paper *Eco-evolutionary dynamics of temperate phages in periodic environments*. The code is written in MATLAB 2022b and MATLAB 2023b. Some functions use parfor loops and therefore need the MATLAB Parallel Computing Toolbox to run. Figure 1 was created in Inkscape 1.3.2 (091e20e, 2023-11-25, custom).


## Notes for code reviewer

There is no existing data being used in this paper. All the results are based on solving the model setup in the methods section of manuscript (see ./Doc folder for the latest version manuscript). 

You will need MATLAB 2022b or MATLAB 2023b to run all the code (works in both versions). You will need to have the MATLAB Parallel Computing Toolbox to generate figures 4,5 and 6. I have hardcoded the use of 12 CPU nodes for parallelizing the computation involved in generating those figures. You might want to change that number for running the code on your machine. 

I suggest reviewing the code files in the following order:
   1. Read the methods section, and Tables S1 and S2 of the manuscript.
   2. Match Equation 7 in the manuscript with the equations in Code\utils\ODE_RSEILV_2species.m
   3. Match the parameter values in Tables S1 and S2 in the manuscript with the numbers in the file Code\lib\fixedparameters.m
   4. Read through the code in Code\utils\PopulationSteadyStateFunction.m
   5. Read through the code in Code\utils\InvasionDynamics.m

Now, you should be able to generate all the figures in the paper (except figure 1 and the diagrams in figure 3) by simply running the corresponding Code\Figure_FigureNumber.m file. Make sure you are in the ./Code directory while running those scripts.

NB: Please note that for Mac and Linux machine while generating figures the paths will break. You might need to change the paths. You can manually add the path as 
```matlab
addpath(genpath('./../')
```

## Folder content description

### ./Doc

Contains the most up-to-date version fo the manuscript.

### ./Data

Contains .mat files generated by running the scripts Figure4.m, Figure5.m and Figure6.m.

- **"SteadyState_CyclePeriod=\<CyclePeriod\>,S0=\<InitialHostDensity\>,V0=\<InitialViralDensity\>,q_L=\<q_L\>,q_V=\<q_V\>.mat"**: contains steady state viral densities and number of cycles required to reach steady state for a range of integration probabilities and induction rates, given a growth cycle duration of *Cycle Period*, initial host density *S0*, initial viral density *V0*, lysogen passaging fraction *q_L* and virion passaging fraction *q_V*.

- **"Invasion_CyclePeriod=\<CyclePeriod\>,S0=\<InitialHostDensity\>,V0=\<InitialViralDensityofResident\>,q_L=\<q_L\>,q_V=\<q_V\>.mat"**: contains viral densities at invasion, matrix corresponding to the pairwise invasion plots and number of cycles required to ascertain invasion success or failure, given a growth cycle duration of *Cycle Period*, initial host density *S0*, initial viral density *V0*, lysogen passaging fraction *q_L* and virion passaging fraction *q_V*.

### ./Figures

Output folder for figures generated by figure producing scripts.

### ./Code

Contains all code associated with the manuscript.

- **Code/lib/colorpalette.m :** Contains font and color scheme settings used in figures throughout the manuscript. This script is run at the beginning of each figure generating script.

- **Code/lib/fixedparameters.m :** Contains all parameters that are help constant across different simulations associated with the manuscript. This script is run at the beginning of each figure generating script.

- **Code/utils/ODE_RSEILV_2species.m :** Returns derivative of system dynamics at time t given life history parameters and system state at time t. Computes *Equation (7)* presented in the main manuscript.

- **Code/utils/PopulationSteadyStateFunction.m :** Function computes the steady state of the virus host system for given values of life history traits, initial conditions, growth cycle duration and filtration conditions. Output gets stored in "../Data/SteadyState_CyclePeriod=\<CyclePeriod\>,S0=\<InitialHostDensity\>,V0=\<InitialViralDensity\>,q_L=\<q_L\>,q_V=\<q_V\>.mat". *Note:* Function uses a parfor loop and takes the number of nodes over which to parallelize as input.

- **Code/utils/InvasionDynamics.m :** Function computes pairwise invasions between resident-mutant pairs with given life history traits, initial conditions, growth cycle duration and filtration conditions. Output gets stored in "../Data/Invasion_CyclePeriod=\<CyclePeriod\>,S0=\<InitialHostDensity\>,V0=\<InitialViralDensity\>,q_L=\<q_L\>,q_V=\<q_V\>.mat". *Note:* Function uses a parfor loop and takes the number of nodes over which to parallelize as input.

- **Code/Figure2.m :** Generates figure 2.

- **Code/Figure3.m :** Generates figure 3 in the manuscript. The diagrams in panels B, D and F in figure 3 were added to the plots generated by Figure3.m later using Inkscape.

- **Code/Figure4.m :** Generates figure 4 in the manuscript. Uses the PopulationSteadyStateFunction and InvasionDynamics functions and therefore needs the Parallel Computing ToolBox.

- **Code/Figure5.m :** Generates figure 5 in the manuscript. Uses the PopulationSteadyStateFunction and InvasionDynamics functions and therefore needs the Parallel Computing ToolBox.

- **Code/Figure6.m :** Generates figure 6 in the manuscript. Uses the PopulationSteadyStateFunction and InvasionDynamics functions and therefore needs the Parallel Computing ToolBox.

- **Code/Figure7.m :** Generates figure 7 in the manuscript.

- **Code/FigureS1_2_3.m :** Generates SI figures 1,2 and 3.

- **Code/FigureS4.m :** Generates SI figure 4.

- **Code/FigureS5.m :** Generates SI figure 5.

- **Code/FigureS6.m :** Generates SI figure 6.

- **Code/FigureS7.m :** Generates SI figure 7.
